{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf290
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Slide: black hole solutions
\b0 \ulnone \
\
-] Consider a charged non rotating point of mass at the origin from which we want to know the space-time as it is curved by this object. There is no time in the problem and also is there no dynamics in the angular directions, which means one starts from a static and spherically symmetric Ansatz.\
\
-] One then puts this Ansatz in Einstein's els and solves for the remaining radial direction. We then find the following metric, which is the Reisner-Nordstr\'f6m metric. \
\
-] This metric has two coordinate singularities for the radial values r+ and r-. These two surfaces are called horizons. r+ is the outer horizon and physically this surface can be crossed from the outside to the inside but not the other way around. This is also true for light such that we call the mass who generates this effects, black holes.\
\
-] Notice from the squareroot that these singularities would disappear if the charge were taken to exceed the mass. These possibilities are excluded as unphysical since there would be more electromagnetic energy than mass (which is the sum of all energy) in the space-time. This prevents us also from observing a naked singularity at the horizon and this excluding is called the cosmic censorship hypothesis.\
\
-] If we saturate the bound such that the two horizons coincide we call the black hole extremal and this configuration is a black hole which has the maximum charge possible for the given mass.}